The principal job I did when I was in that position
is all right now. You bet. This was nothing to do
with the interior of the United States at all.
It was the problem of waterlogging and salinity in
the irrigated areas of West Pakistan. On
the partition of India into two countries,
most of the irrigated area, most of the well
irrigated area, went to Pakistan.
This was in the Punjab, the western part of the
Punjab, the part that went to Pakistan. and in the
Sindh, which is a province of Pakistan just south
of Punjab. For 100 years, the British have been
developing a vast irrigation system in this area,
using the waters from the five tributaries of the
Punjab, the Jhelum, the Chinab, the Ravi, the
Sudluj, and the Beas. The word Punjab means five
rivers, Punjab. The same word as Pentagon,
Pentagon, or Pentathlon.
These are all the tributaries of the Indus River,
which is
the great river that rises in the Himalayas and
flows west and into the Arabian Sea.
Geologically, it's the whole Indo-Gangetic
plain, the plain from the Indus all the way to the
Bay of Bengal is one geological phenomenon formed
by the crushing of the Indian subcontinent as it
moved north across the Indian Ocean and came up
against the continent of Asia, pushed up the
Himalayas and pushed down this huge trough. And
during a good part of the last few million years,
The waters of that, most of that plain flowed
westward into the Arabian Sea. Now most of the
water flows east into the Bengal. That's the
Ganges River. But a very large, about a third of the
water flows southwest into the Arabian Sea in the
Indus River and its tributaries.
The British have built what are called barrages
across the the tributaries of the Indus and across
the Indus itself. The biggest barrage in the
world, the biggest single irrigation system in
the world is the Great Sucker Barrage,
which diverts the Indus River into four
different, four or five different huge canals in
the same.
There were lots of other rivers and lots of other
barrages.
Next to each barrage were huge irrigation canals,
which carried water over what were called doabs,
that is, the areas between two of the tributaries.
For example, the Upper Berry Doab Canal came off
the
Ravi River and irrigated the area between the Ravi
and the There was
a canal that did the same thing. It came off the and
irrigated what was called between the and the and
so forth. Altogether, about 25 million acres of
irrigated land. That's more than the total of
irrigated land in the United States. It's all one
big system.
And after partition, the Indians felt very much
aggrieved because the waters of these
tributaries arise in India, in Kashmir. One of the
substantive issues in the dispute about Kashmir
was the river waters. Finally, about 1960, The
dispute was settled by something called the Indus
Waters Treaty,
which provided that the waters of the three
eastern tributaries, the Bayas, the Sudluja, and
the Ravi, would go to India. And the waters of the
three western rivers, the Indus, the Jhelum, and
the Chunab, would go to Pakistan. This averted a
war between the two countries. And the price for
averting that war an enormous change in the
irrigation works so that the water from the
western rivers could be diverted to irrigate the
part of Pakistan which had previously been
irrigated from the Ravi and the Sudnuj.
And this consisted of the building of a great link
canal between the rivers and siphons and dams. Two
big dams were contemplated, the Mangladama Dam on
the Jhelum Tarbella Dam on the Indus. And these are
just about the largest dams in the world, although
they don't hold very much water. They hold about 10
million acre feet of water at most, whereas the
Glen Canyon Dam holds about 100 million acre feet
of water on
the Colorado River. As part of this project,
something was felt that something also had to be
done to provide drainage for the irrigated system
because something was happening which always
happened in the irrigation system without
drainage, and that is that salt was accumulating
in the soil and water, the water table rose, had
risen to the point where there were The low-lying
areas were what are called waterlogged. Water was
actually standing at the surface.
By far, the most serious of these two things was the
accumulation of salt. And the way we got involved
with it was that you may remember in 1961,
President Kennedy decreed that we would not
provide any more arms to Pakistan. President
Ayyub came over here and made an impassioned
speech to Congress about this. And he was quite
popular in Congress. He was a very impressive man.
He was a big man with a baton. He looked like an
English general, talked like an English general,
and behaved like an English general. But a very
intelligent general, not a stupid one by any
means. Very appealing guy.
Kennedy felt that he had to do something for
Pakistan. And it previously had been worked out by
Wiesner and by Abdus Salam, who was a science
advisor to Ayub. He's a Pakistani physicist, a
professor at the University of London, that Ayub
would suggest that we try to work on this problem of
waterlogging and salinity. a very distressing
and well-publicized problem in Pakistan. And
Kennedy said, that's just the kind of problem my
science advises himself. Jerry knew nothing
whatever about waterlogging and salinity. And so
he called on me to get involved with it. I didn't
know anything about waterlogging and salinity
either, but I'm an oceanographer, and I'm
supposed to know something about salt.
So I organized a task
force panel. It was called the White House
Interior Panel on Water Logging and Salinity in
West Pakistan.
And this was a, I didn't know quite who to get on the
panel, but I got a lot of help from a lot of people,
including a group of guys at Harvard. Harvey
Brooks was at that time. Weisner's deputy and the
vice chairman of PSAC, Resident Science Advisory
Committee. And he and I were old friends. And he
said that there was a group at Harvard who had been
working on problems of water resources
development, particularly an economist named
Bob Dorfman and an engineer named Harold Thomas
and their students. And we put them on the panel. A
group of us, a group of the panel members, one of the
other panel members was Rollin Eckes, who was that
time president of Richfield Oil Company, an old
friend of mine. Another was Wadley, who was
agronomist, senior agronomist at the USDA.
Another was a man from the from the AID. He was a
specialist in administration. His name was
Blanford, John Blanford. And we had the head of the
salinity laboratory at Riverside, Charlie
Bower, and one of his good men. We got a bunch of idea
men, goody men named Leonard Katz, who was an
entrepreneur and inventor in Cambridge. John
Isaacs, who was an idea man here at Scripps. And
this group went out to Pakistan and looked at the
Punjab and at the Sindh, made a trip across
country, driving across country. And I never will
forget the day that Charlie Bower looked at a corn
plant. looked at the leaves of the corn plant and
said, the problem with this corn is not that it's
got too much salt in the soil, but there isn't any
nitrogen in the soil. This plant is lacking in
chlorophyll because it has insufficient
nitrogen. And that was the payoff to the whole
problem. Water logging and salinity was, in a
sense, a non-problem. The real problem was poor
agricultural practice. The irrigation system
had
been started in the middle of the 19th century and
long before irrigation or agriculture or
high-yielding agriculture was well understood.
And they were spreading water too thin on too much
land. So the plants were starved with water as well
as being starved with nutrients.
And the reason that they've done that was that they
were trying to develop subsistence agriculture.
And subsistence agriculture depends on every
farmer having as much land as he can cultivate.
Well, they spread out over a lot of land and didn't
give enough water to any of it. But at the same time,
the canals leaked, and the whole canal system
leaked. About 40% of the water went down to the
underground. So this represented an enormous
additional water supply, which could be pumped
out and used for irrigation. And it was by far the
best way to store the water. Storing it
underground doesn't evaporate very much. It
evaporated some when you got the water table close
to the surface. And that evaporation was what
caused the salt to accumulate at the surface. And
the salt problem didn't certainly look bad. The
English, in their systematic way, had
established villages in all these dohabs on a
two-mile grid, two-mile squares, village every
two miles. And there were large areas where these
villages had disappeared or half disappeared,
where the ground had become covered with salt, and
the farmers had to abandon agriculture.
Pakistanis thought they were losing about 50,000
acres a year to salt accumulation. And maybe they
were.
The solution, the technical solution, was to
drill what are called tube wells, which are big
wells that are powered by machinery, by motors,
either electric or diesel. Either electric
motors or diesel engines.
and to pump out the water, and thereby to lower the
water table, and then use the water that you pumped
out for irrigation and use enough water so some of
it ran back down into the ground. And in the process
of doing that, you could wash the salt out of the
salt back into the underground.
And this is not a permanent solution, but it's a
solution that will do very well for 20 to 30 years.
On a permanent basis, you have to build horizontal
drains, that is, drains that will actually carry
as much salt out of the region as is coming into the
region from the rivers. That's not very much,
actually. Only rivers are remarkably fresh. But
they do have about 200 parts per million of salt.
That's quite a bit of salt year after year. And
you've just got to get rid of that salt by carrying
it away, even to the Arabian Sea or to the Rajasthan
desert. That's not been done yet. But this
vertical drainage that we recommended was well
known. And if you do it in the way that we
recommended, you can actually lower the water
table, eliminate water logging, wash the salt
down, and reclaim the land. But more importantly,
you've got a lot more water. About 35% or 40% more
water.
And this was on a very big scale. The total water
supply, including the underground water, about
100 million acre feet. That's enough to irrigate
25 million acres to a depth of four feet. If it all
gets on the irrigated fields, it doesn't either
evaporate or sink into the ground. If it sinks into
the ground, you can reclaim it. Pump it up and use
it. And that's where this 100 million acre feet
thing comes from. But the problem was that this
vertical drainage had been tried on too small a
scale. They put in a few wells, and underground
water would flow in from the side as fast as you
pumped it out. As a result, they were not able to
lower the water table. And we did a lot of the,
Harold Thomas and also a guy named Herb Skibitsky
of the Geological Survey made models of the
underground flow. both digital, computer, and
analog models. And we showed that you had to put
wells in an area as big as somewhere between
100,000 and a million acres, or it wouldn't work.
You had to drain a large area. So you could drain it,
pump it out faster than the water was flowing from
the side. And that depends on the ratio between
area and perimeter. You can see if you have . well
field in an area of one square mile, you've got four
miles of perimeter in one mile of area. In that
case, the water flows in from the side as fast as you
pump it out. Let's say you have instead of one
square mile, you have 1,600 square miles. Then you
have an area of 40 miles on the side, or 160 miles.
perimeter for 1,600 square miles of area, in
contrast to the other extreme where I said there
were four miles of perimeter for one square mile of
area. And if you use a scale like that, then there's
no problem about pumping it out. And that's what we
were able to show with our models. But far more
important than that was that this was really not a
problem. of water logging and salinity, but a
problem of improving agricultural technology,
modernizing the agriculture. And that's meant
using fertilizer. It meant using high-yielding
varieties, which were just appearing in Mexico at
that time. It meant using pesticides. It meant
giving instruction and extension services to the
farmers. making it worthwhile for the farmers to
increase their yields by stabilizing prices and
things like that. And we said, and this is the most
important thing we said, was that this was one of
the great natural resources of the Earth. And it
could be a garden. It could be like the Imperial
Valley. But instead of 500,000 acres like the
Imperial Valley, it had 25 million acres, 50 times
the size of the Imperial Valley. This was really a
revolutionary idea to the bureaucrats who were
running Pakistan.
One of my best friends became a man named Gul
Amishat Khan, who was chairman of the Water and
Power Development Authority of West Pakistan. He
was a member of the elite civil service of
Pakistan. and CSP, a remarkably able man. He had
about as high an IQ as I'd ever seen on anybody. He
could handle about a dozen of us who were on one side
of the table. He was on the other all by himself with
no problem. He was just so darned competent and so
knowledgeable and so intelligently able to grasp
new ideas.
And what we proposed was, and this was a mistake,
but it was a mistake that everybody had made, who we
went along with, that the government should do
this job in million-acre tracks. That means a
track 1,600 miles an area. And there would be 25 of
these tracks, and they should go after one after
the other in succession. On the theory that that
was about all we could do to really introduce
modernized agriculture. Maybe they could do one a
year or something like that on a 25-year program.
Wilhelmi Schock objected to this, and rightly so,
on the basis that politically this was
impossible. You had to give some benefit to
everybody. But the solution, the problem was
really solved in spite of both of us by the farmers
of Papastop. When they found out about these two
wells, to drill them all by themselves. And they
drilled something like 70,000 tube wells in three
years, while the government was drilling about
2,000. And what none of us had realized was that
these farmers were very responsive to change if
they could really see the benefits of the change.
And I have a saying, which I often use, There's no
change agent quite as effective as an Indian or a
Pakistani farmer in hot pursuit of a rupee. It was
just fantastic what these people did. And within a
few years, agricultural production in Pakistan
was increasing by about 6% a year, about twice as
fast as the population. And the new seeds came in,
and the fertilizer came in, and the water. and they
developed the water, and all of this was really
quite a spectacular change.
I was back in Pakistan last summer, and
agriculture is stagnant in Pakistan at the
moment. It's not growing. And one of the things I'm
very puzzled about is, why is this so? Pakistanis
have their old complaint that we need more water
and we need more drainage. I don't really think
that's the problem. I think the problem is the
economic and social structure of the country,
which essentially puts agriculture at the lowest
possible priority. And the second problem is that
most of the land that could now be increasing its
production is in quite small farms, farms that are
about five acres or less. And if you look at the
economics of it, small farmers like that don't
really have much incentive to increase their
production. They just can't make enough profit.
You need to find ways in which you develop a farming
system for small farmers. This is a social,
economic, political, technical complex of
problems, which is not very well understood by
anybody. And that's the next big step that needs to
be undertaken. I'm going to try to go back to
Pakistan this summer and look into this much more
thoroughly than I have been able to up until now.
But at least for up until about 1968 or 69,
agriculture looked like a great success story in
Pakistan. It was being modernized. And the report
that we wrote, we called it Land and Water
Development in this Plain. became a kind of a bible
called the Revelle Report. It was superseded by a
very much more elaborate World Bank study, which
was published about 1969 or 70, but which
essentially came to exactly the same conclusions
that we do in terms of the possibilities for
development, but laying much more stress, as they
should, on the farmers themselves and helping the
farmers help themselves.
And of course, in the process of writing this
report, I didn't get it done until 1963, long after
I'd left the Department of the Interior and gone
back to University of California.
I got to be very good friends with people at
Harvard, particularly Dorfman and Thomas and Bob
Burden.
One or two other people there. And they were about,
at that time, they were about to,
they'd been planning to organize a center for
population studies at Harvard.
And Harold Thomas suggested my name for the
directorship of it. I was really quite unhappy out
here. I had two jobs here, and this was impossible.
I was director of the Scripps Institution and also
university dean of research at the same time.
University dean of research turned out to be a
non-job. Nobody with nobody needed a university
dean of research.
Professors just don't like to have anybody tell
them about what they should do in the research
business. At the same time, I was really
neglecting the Scripps Institution. And Herb
York had resigned as chancellor. And
it turned out that they didn't want me to be
chancellor. So I decided I'd go back to Harvard and
become head of the Center for Population Studies,
which I started, actually, in 1964. which I've
just this past summer retired from. But basically
because of my interest in resources,
the center has always concentrated more on
matching resources to population rather than
thinking about how you reduce population. In
other words, we've thought about that too a lot,
but we've thought in terms of economic and social
development rather than in terms of family
planning programs. This was not really a way to win
friends and influence people among the
population establishment. They were all hooked
on family planning. And moreover, they're not
really much interested in development, but the
kind of people who support population center to
people like Cordelia Scaife May of the Mellon
family in Pittsburgh, who basically believes
there are too many niggers in the world. And is much
more concerned about the damage to the
environment than she is about people. And these
are these fanatics on the right wing of the
population. say that the world is going to hell
because of overpopulation. It isn't going to hell
because of overpopulation. It may be going to
hell, but for other reasons. But our feeling was
and is that rapid population growth, which is the
real problem more than overpopulation, rapid
population growth is as much a symptom of poverty
as it is a cause of poverty. And what really needs to
be done is to do something about poverty. So one of
our big projects at the center is a Ford
Foundation-supported project for systematic
analysis and modeling of resources development
in the Indian subcontinent, particularly
agricultural, water, and land development. And
we've been working particularly on the Ganges
plain the last few years. Before that, we worked on
Bangladesh, where we're going to expand it to
include Sri Lanka and Nepal and Pakistan. That's
under the direction of one of Harold Thomas's
students, who's now become a professor named
Peter Rogers, who is one of the young men that
worked on our, at that time, graduate students
that worked on our Indus Basin program with
Harold.
And I'm going back this fall. primarily to work
with Peter and help out with this board foundation
project. What it consists of is that we bring
Indian engineers and economists and government
officials to Cambridge in a period of six months to
a year and have them do research on problems of
agricultural land and water development.